Intro to Analyzing Data Using Spreadsheets

we have learned how to collect and clean our data, it is time to decide the best method for analysis. 
we will discuss the importance of filtering, sorting, performing calculations, and shaping our data to provide meaningful information.
Deciding how to manipulate our data can sometimes be difficult. Before we make any changes or adjustments, 
we will need to visualize the final output. Below are some questions to ask before beginning the task.
How big is the dataset? What type of filtering is required to find the necessary information?

How should the data be sorted? What type of calculations are needed? Now that we have visualized the final output, 
we must decide the best approach to shape our data. The most basic step would be to filter and sort the data.
By sorting the data, we are able to organize it based on conditions such as alphabetically or numerically. 
For example, if we wanted to check for duplicate order numbers, we could sort the data and quickly see any duplicates. 
After sorting and removing the duplicate row, we find that the view needs to be more specific to meet our requirements.

We now decide that we only want to see the data for the month of November. By adding a filter, we can now choose to 
only see items with a ‘MONTH_ID” that is equal to “11”. By filtering our data, we are now able to only see the rows
that meet the filter criteria and it allows us to better analyze our information. Becoming familiar with all of the 
tools to analyze data can seem daunting, but one key benefit of using a spreadsheet is the ability to use functions. 
Functions in Excel are organized by several categories, including mathematical, statistical, logical, financial, and
date and time-based. Let’s say we wanted to get an average of company revenue for the month of June. We realize there
are over 100 items that would need to be calculated.

In normal circumstances, to get an average, we would have to create a formula to add each row and divide by the total
number of rows. This type of calculation would not only be very long, but can expose the analyst to possibly making a mistake.
=B1+B2+B3…../160 With the use of a function, we would be able to simplify our calculation in one easy step. =AVERAGE(B1:B160)
While sorting and filtering data on our spreadsheet can be useful on its own, first converting your data to a table has many 
benefits. When we convert our data into a table, we are able to filter and calculate the data more efficiently. One example 
is the ability to easily calculate columns.

For the column ‘MSRP’, we choose ‘Sum’ and we’re able to quickly calculate the sum of the column. If we then look at the data,
and only want to calculate the ‘MSRP’ total based on Japan, we would filter the ‘Country’ column to only display Japan, and the
column would then only add the values in the rows that were associated with Japan. While all data may not work in a table, 
there are quite a few advantages to formatting your data as a table: Automatic calculations even when filtering Column headings
never disappear Banded rows to make reading easier Tables will automatically expand when adding new rows Sometimes data needs 
to be more organized then what a basic tabular format can give us, and creating pivot tables with charts can be a better way 
to analyze and display the required information. In Excel we have the option of creating a pivot table to display and analyze 
our data, and optionally, an associated pivot chart. For example, let’s say we want to know what company ordered products in 
the month of October. From the original table of data, we create a pivot table to organize and analyze the required data, 
along with a pivot chart to display the information. By then adding the month filter to the newly created pivot table, 
we can see the results for the month of October not only in the table, but the changes are automatically updated in the pivot chart.

When trying to single out specific information in a large dataset, a pivot table is a nice way to show only the information 
that is required. This allows us to quickly and easily scan the essential information. Pivot charts are a nice accessory to
pivot tables, as they allow us to visually process data, and in most cases, will let the audience grasp the information quicker. 
The advantages of selecting a pivot table and chart are: Manipulate data without using formulas Quickly summarize large data sets 
Ability to display engaging charts and graphs, we learned about the importance of filtering, sorting, performing 
calculations, and shaping our data to provide meaningful information, and we learned about some of the tools to begin analyzing 
our data. we will learn more about filtering and sorting our data.



Filtering and Sorting Data in Excel

we learned how to use the Flash Fill and Text to Columns features in Excel to help clean data. 
we will discuss how to filter and sort our data to enable us to control what information is displayed, and 
how it’s displayed in our worksheets. Filtering your data enables you to gain more control over which parts of 
your data are displayed at any given time in Excel. This can help with the visibility of data by narrowing down
the data to within specified criteria and parameters, and it can also help when searching for specific pieces of data. 
To filter your data, the first thing you need to do is turn filtering on, which is very simple. On the Data tab, click Filter, 
and that’s it. You will now see a small filter icon next to each of the column headers.

As a sidenote; if you want to only filter on one or more columns, select those columns first, then click Filter. 
As another sidenote; if you format your data as a table, the columns automatically have filter controls added to them. 
So now, each column has a filter that can be applied to the data in that column. In the Orderdate column you can filter
on the years, in Productline you can filter on the different product types, and in Customername you can filter on each 
customer by name. Let’s first filter on the year. We’ll select orders from 2004 only, by deselecting the other year. 
And if we wanted to, we could expand the year and filter by months also, but we won’t do that for now.

If you look in the status bar at the bottom of the worksheet, you can see that there are only 50 out of 114 records 
now displayed. If you want to clear a filter, you can either click the ‘Clear Filter From…’ option, or click the Select 
All item in the filter list. Now let’s filter on the productline column, to display only the rows that hold data for 
sales of classic cars. And again, we’ll clear the filter. Lastly, we’ll filter on the customername column, and only 
display sales to Mini Gifts Distributors Ltd. And then clear that filter. So far, we’ve only applied one filter at a 
time, but suppose you want to filter down to a greater degree?

We can do that too by just enabling all those filters together and now we are only displaying sales of classic cars,
to Mini Gifts Distributors Ltd, in 2004. Remember, if you only want to clear one filter, then click its filter button
in the column header, and click the ‘Clear filter from’ option but if you want to quickly clear ALL filters, 
you can use the Clear button in the Sort & Filter group on the Data tab. So far, we’ve used what are commonly referred 
to as AutoFilters, but you can also use custom filters to specify other criteria, to apply a filter to text or numbers. 
For example, if you wanted to see sales orders that are over or under a certain value, you can do that with custom filters. 
For the sales column, let’s add a number filter that only displays sales that are over $2,000. If you look in the status bar, 
you can see that we are now showing 111 out of 114 records. Then let’s clear that filter and filter it the other way to display
the sales orders that are BELOW $2000.

We can see that there are only 3 orders that are below $2000. It’s important to note that the data rows that we don’t see have 
not been removed they are still there they have just been hidden from view by the filters. And this is indicated by the row 
numbers you see on the left in blue. The row numbers start at 69, and jump in large increments, indicating that there are many
more rows of data in our dataset, than are currently being displayed. Let’s clear those filters. If we look at a column filter
for a column that contains text, you will see that the menu item changes to ‘Text Filters’ instead of ‘Number Filters’,
and you can see there are several text filter options. (And if you want to turn off filtering altogether for a worksheet, 
just click the Filter button on the Data tab.

Now, let’s take a look at the basic sorting capabilities in Excel. Sorting is a very important part of the role of a typical 
Data Analyst. You might need to organize your text-based data alphabetically, your number-based data numerically, 
or your date-based data chronologically. When you sort data using these logical parameters, it makes it easier for
you to conceptualize and visualize your data in a more meaningful way. When sorting data, the first thing you need to 
do is select which data to sort. For example, if you want to sort your customers alphabetically, select a cell in the
Customername column first and then either sort by A to Z or by Z to A. And if you want to sort your sales figures 
numerically, select a cell in the Sales column first… and then either sort from smallest to largest or from largest to smallest.

And lastly, if you want to sort your customer’s order dates chronologically, select a cell in the Orderdate column first… 
then sort from oldest to newest or from newest to oldest. But you can also sort your data by more than one column at a time. 
Simply select a cell in your data, then on the Data tab, click Sort. Then either use the Sort by column suggested, or use
the drop-down list to select a different column; in this case we’ll choose the ‘Orderdate’ column as our first sorting criteria,
and we’ll choose ‘Oldest to Newest’ in the Order drop-down list. To add a further sorting level, you click ‘Add Level’.
Then you choose another sort column in the ‘Then by’ drop-down list, in our case we’ll choose Sales, and for this sort 
level we’ll choose ‘Largest to Smallest’ in the Order list. If you have a header row in your data – as we do here – then 
ensure you select the ‘My data has headers’ checkbox, then click OK to sort.

So, the data is now sorted to list the oldest orders by order date first, then within each order date, 
if there are multiple instances with the same order date… then the next sorting level lists data by the largest order values first, 
down to the smallest order values. we learned how to use the Filter and Sort tools in Excel to filter and sort 
our data to enable us to control what information is displayed, and how it is displayed in our worksheets.


Useful Functions for Data Analysis

Now that we’ve learned how to use the Filter and Sort tools in Excel to filter and sort our data to enable us to
control what information is displayed, and how it is displayed in our worksheets, in this video we’ll discuss
how to use some of the most common functions a Data Analyst might use; namely IF, IFS, COUNTIF, and SUMIF. First up,
let’s look at how to use the IF function. The IF function is one of the most used logical functions in Excel. 
The IF function enables you to logically compare a value against criteria you set in the function, and then return 
a result based on whether the result of the logical comparison is true or false. And these values can be text values 
or numeric values. An IF function essentially says; “if something is true, then return a value or do something, 
but if it’s not true, then return a different value or do something else”. For example, in our vehicle toy sales 
worksheet, if we wanted to have a column that recorded whether the order had been shipped or not, you could add 
a new column to the right of the existing column – let’s call it shipped?

and then enter the formula seen in cell H2 This formula is saying – if the text in G2 says ‘shipped’ then return ‘Yes’, 
and if it doesn’t then return ‘No’. You can then use the Fill Handle to copy this formula down the column.
You can see that most of the cells do say ‘Yes’, but some don’t, as the order hasn’t been shipped for one reason or another.
We could also use the IF function to emphasize the size of an order. So, if we add a new column to the right of ‘Sales’,
and name it ‘3K plus or minus’ Then enter the formula seen in cell F2 This formula is saying – if the order is over three thousand,
then return the text “Over 3k”, but if it isn’t, then return the text “Under 3k”. And we can copy the formula down the column.
In an ideal world, you would only use the IF function to apply one or two conditions, but there may be scenarios where you want
to apply multiple conditions.

In these cases, you can use the ‘nesting’ capabilities of functions to bring together several IF statements in one formula;
these are called ‘nested IF functions’. For example, if we add another column here for the order size. 
And then enter the formula seen in cell F2. You can see that this formula, contains multiple IF functions; 
one is needed for each condition one for Large, one for Medium, and one for Small and it requires three sets of parentheses. 
So, it’s a relatively long and complex formula, but it does work. Again, we can copy the formula down the column. Even though
Excel technically supports the nesting of up to 64 different IF functions in a formula, it is not a recommended best practice.

Having multiple IF functions in a single formula can become extremely challenging to manage. For example, suppose you come 
across a formula like this that you haven’t used for some time, or even worse, was created by someone else; 
it could be quite difficult to work out how and why it is being used. Also, if your conditions increase, 
then you need to add more conditions to an already quite complex and long formula, which will only complicate matters more. 
To resolve this issue, a new function was developed called IFS. The IFS function is only supported on Excel 2019,
Excel for Microsoft 365, and Excel for the web. As the name suggests, this function can replace multiple nested IF functions 
being used in a single formula, to simplify matters. (So, if we add a further column for order size but this time we’ll use 
the IFS function instead.

As you can see in cell G2, this formula only has one set of parentheses instead of three, and only uses one function instead of three.
Let’s copy that formula down the column too. Now let’s have a look at another example of using the IF function, but we’ll combine
it with Conditional Formatting too. If we switch to the car sales worksheet… and add a new column to the right of the Year Resale
Value column and call it ‘Retention %’. Then, we enter the formula seen in cell G2, which will divide the ‘Year Resale Value’, 
by the original ‘Retail Price’. We need to format this as a percentage. And then we can copy it down the column.

Next, we’ll add a column to highlight the retention value for each car. The formula we add here in cell H2 uses the 
IF function to state that if the percentage in the previous column is greater than 69%, then mark it as ‘Good’, 
but if it isn’t, then mark it as ‘Poor’. Once again, we’ll copy the formula down the column. We could also use 
Conditional Formatting to highlight the retention value percentages even more. We select H2, and on the Home tab, 
click Conditional Formatting, and make a new rule. The condition in our rule will only format cells that contain a 
specific text value… and that value is the word ‘GOOD’. And if it does match that condition, then format it with a 
dark green font and fill the cell in pale green.

Let’s copy that conditional formatting down the rest of the column. You can see that the cells that contain the word 
’good’ are now formatted as we defined, but the cells containing the word ‘poor’ are not. Let’s add another conditional 
format rule. This time, we’ll select Manage Rules, because we are going to add another rule to our existing rule. he new
rule will be the same as the previous one, with the exception of looking for a match with the word ‘poor’ instead, 
and formatting those matching cells with red text and a pink background fill. And once again, we copy that down the column.
Now all the cells that contain the word ‘poor’ are formatted as red text with a pink cell fill. Let’s now have a quick look
at how to use the COUNTIF function.

COUNTIF is one of the statistical functions provided in Excel. You can use it to count the number of cells that meet a certain 
criterion; such as the number of instances where an employee’s name appears in a list of sales invoices, or the number of 
occasions a particular part number appears in a list of purchase orders. Let’s switch to the vehicle toy sales worksheet. 
Suppose you want to find out how many of the sales orders in the list went to customers based in the United Kingdom. 
We enter the formula you see in cell AD7. Note that when we are using text as a criterion, we have to enclose the text 
in quotation marks. So there were 6 sales orders in the UK.

And if you wanted to discover the same thing for French customers, then you would just edit the existing formula, or copy 
it and then edit it. You can see there were 14 orders for French customers. Notice that this time the text entered was in 
lowercase, and it still works; so names in this function are not case-sensitive. And let’s do the same for United States 
customers; there are 41 orders to customers based in the states. There is also a newer function called COUNTIFS which applies
criteria to cells across multiple ranges to count the number of occasions where all criteria have been met. This removes the 
need to use multiple COUNTIF functions in a long and complex single formula. The COUNTIFS function is only supported on Excel 2019,
Excel for Microsoft 365, and Excel for the web.

Now let’s take a quick look at how to use the SUMIF function, which is a very commonly used mathematical function in Excel.
You use the SUMIF function to sum the values within a specified range that meet specified criteria. For example, you might 
want to add up only the salaries that are over a specified salary level, or you might want to find the total of all sales of 
a particular product category. We’ll enter the formula seen in cell AD10 This formula will add up each of the sales orders that 
have a total of more than 3,000 dollars. Again, notice that because we have used an arithmetic operator, that is the ‘greater than’
operator, we must enclose the criterion in quotes. If we specify a criterion that is only a number, we don’t enclose it in quotes. 
So, the total sum of all orders that were over 3,000 dollars is almost 470,000 dollars.

You can also use wildcards such as ‘question mark’ (?) and ‘asterisk’ (*) when searching for partial matches, and you can also
specify to extract values from a different column than the column where you have specified the criteria. For example,
if we enter the formula you can see in cell AD13, it will sum all the car sales in column E, for only those products in the
‘productline’ column that end in ‘cars’. There is also a newer function called SUMIFS that you can use to sum cells based on
multiple criteria. This removes the need to use multiple SUMIF functions in a long and complex single formula. 
The SUMIFS function is only supported on Excel 2019, Excel for Microsoft 365, and Excel for the web. 
we learned how to use the IF, IFS, COUNTIF, and SUMIF functions.

we’ll look at how to use the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP reference functions.


Using the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP Functions

Now that we've learned how to use the IF, IFS, COUNTIF, and SUMIF functions, in this video, we'll look at how to use
the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP reference functions. VLOOKUP is one of the most commonly used reference type functions in Excel. 
It enables you to find data referenced in a lookup table. It stands for vertical lookup, and therefore, is a useful tool 
when you want to find something in a table or a range by column. Shortly, we will look at HLOOKUP, which stands for
horizontal lookup, which looks for data by row instead. VLOOKUP works by using a common shared key between the source 
data and the lookup data in the lookup table. A typical lookup formula would look like equal sign, VLOOKUP( B3,A2:B12,2,FALSE),
where B3 is the lookup value.

That is the value or word you're looking for. A2:B12 is the lookup table or range. That is the table array or range of
cells that contains the lookup value. In a formula, Excel references this as table_array. The lookup table can be on the
same worksheet or in another separate worksheet. Two is the lookup column number. That is the number of the column in the 
lookup table that contains the value you are looking for.

In a formula, Excel references this as Col_index_num. FALSE is an optional parameter that determines whether the match
found has to be exact, denoted by false, or can be approximate, denoted by true. In a formula, Excel references this as
[range_lookup]. The square brackets round this argument in the formula, signifies that it is an optional argument,
whereas the others are required arguments of a VLOOKUP formula. If you don't specify the optional false or true parameter 
in your formula, it will default to true. That is an approximate match is required. You can also use the number zero 
instead of false and the number one instead of true.

Now let's see the VLOOKUP function in action. In the car sales worksheet, suppose we wanted a quick price list of our favorite cars.
The first thing we need to do is put the column containing the value we want to search for in the left most column as VLOOKUP 
requires this. Then we can delete the original column. We then enter the formula seen in cell V16, which is looking for the 
word Corvette in the table array from cell A2 to G156. Then looks for the value in the fifth column, in this case, the price 
column that matches the row containing Corvette and returns an exact value of $45,705. Note that in this example, we are using
a part of our existing data table as the lookup table or table array.

Let's format that as US currency, then we'll format it to zero decimal places. In fact, rather than use the reference 
A25 in the formula, it will be easier to use the reference to the word Corvette in the mini table in this worksheet 
where our list of favorite cars is. That is V5, and the formula still works. Now, let's copy that formula up to the 
favorite car table above it in the worksheet. But there's a problem because when we copy the formula, the cell references changed. 
This happened because as we learned earlier in this course, the default state of cell references is relative, and we want them 
to be absolute in this case. Let's undo that copy operation.

To make the cell references absolute, we need to add dollar symbols to all the cell references in the formula. This can either 
be done manually or you can put the cursor in each cell reference in turn in the formula and press F4 each time to automatically 
add the dollar symbols. Let's try and copy the formula again. This time, it works. If we use the fill handle on cell W5 to copy 
it down to the rest of the cars, it doesn't work. In fact, we end up with the same result in every cell. Why? Because each one 
is referencing the same cells in the lookup value, because we used an absolute reference.

All we need to do now is modify the formula to remove the absolute reference for just the column parameter in the lookup 
value part of the formula by removing the dollar symbol. In cell W5, we change $V$5 to $V5,. Then when we drag the fill handle down,
it will copy the formula correctly, and all the prices will be changed to reflect their correct retail price. Lastly, to show that
the two tables are now connected by this VLOOKUP function, if we change the retail price for the Chevrolet Corvette in the main 
data table and cell E25, the price will also change in the favorite cars price list. Let's now take a look at the HLOOKUP function, 
which, as we mentioned earlier, does the same thing and works in virtually the same way as the VLOOKUP function, but it looks for 
data in rows rather than columns. HLOOKUP looks for a word or value in the top row of a table and then returns a value in the
same column from a row specified in the table array. Therefore, you would use HLOOKUP if your comparison values were situated 
in a row along the top of a data table.

In contrast, you would use VLOOKUP if your comparison values were located in a column to the left of the data you want to find, 
as they were in the previous task. Of the two functions, VLOOKUP is used far more frequently than HLOOKUP because of the nature
of most data tables. The syntax for HLOOKUP is identical to that of VLOOKUP, except that you specify a row index number, 
referenced in a formula by Excel as row_index_num. This indicates the number of the row in the lookup table that contains 
the value you are looking for. Let's create a small lookup table on the right hand side of our main data table. 
A few columns have been hidden in this worksheet to make viewing a little easier. Now we've got low HP, medium HP 
and high HP in the top row of our lookup table.

Next, we'll add Wingdings symbols as ratings for the three horse power levels. One, sad face for the low horsepower rating, 
two neutral faces for the medium rating, and three happy faces for the high horsepower rating. Now, let's add a new column
to the right of the HP level column and call it HP rating. Then in cell L2, we'll enter the HLOOKUP function. 
This function will look for the value in cell K2, which in this case is medium HP, and it will look for it in 
the cell range from Y21 to A22, which is our little lookup table. It will return the answer it finds in Row 2 of the
table under medium HP and use an exact value. Note that we've used some absolute references in this formula too.

Notice that what is returned is the text KK, so we need to format the cell using the Wingdings font.
Now, when we double click the fill handle, the whole column shows the HP rating symbols relevant to each rows HP level value, 
and we're done. Although VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP are regularly still used as the defacto functions for lookup references in Excel, 
there is a newer function called XLOOKUP. This version is only supported on Excel desktop versions from Excel for Microsoft 365 
and on Excel for the web, as well as on Excel for iPad and iPhone and Excel for Android tablets and phones. XLOOKUP is an improved
and combined version of VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP together. It can work in any direction vertically or horizontally. It also uses separate
lookup array and return array values instead of a single table array and a column or row index number.
we learned how to use the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP functions in Excel to find and connect to data referenced in both vertical and 
horizontal lookup tables. the next lesson, we'll start to look at using pivot tables in Excel.


Question 1
Which of the following are valid sorting orders you can choose when adding sorting levels to your data? Select all that apply.
A. Oldest to Newest
Smallest to Largest
Z to A


Question 2
After filtering a column and getting the results, in which two ways can you return to 
showing all the data in a column? Select two answers. 
A. clear the filter   
turn filtering off

Question 3
What do custom filters provide that AutoFilters don't?
A. set multiple filters at the same time   
filter a column to see only above or below a certain value  
associate a formula with the filter control   
display more data   

Question 4
According to the video 'Useful Functions for Data Analysis', what is one of the most common functions a Data Analyst might use?  
COUNTIF
RANDBETWEEN

Question 5
What does VLOOKUP stand for? 
A. Vertical Lookup   


Question 1
If you have multiple filters set, how can you clear all of them at once?
Data tab > Sort & Filter group > Clear 

Question 2
After enabling Filtering, where can you see and access the filter controls?  
Each column header now has a filter control 

Question 3
The IF function applies to one or two conditions, but what if you need to apply multiple conditions?
Use the nesting capabilities of the IF function 

Question 4
When you use nested functions, what is required for each of the functions?
A set of parentheses for each function 

Question 5
The difference between HLOOKUP, VLOOKUP, and XLOOKUP is how they look for data. How does each look for data?
HLOOKUP = by column
VLOOKUP = by row
XLOOKUP = in all directions 


Introduction to Creating Pivot Tables in Excel

Now that we’ve learned how to use the VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP functions, we’ll look at how to create and use Pivot Tables in Excel. 
We’ll first look at how to format our data as a table, then how to create Pivot Tables and use fields in a Pivot Table
to analyze data, and lastly we’ll see how to perform calculations in a Pivot Table. Having a worksheet full of informational
data is all very well, but to really get some use out of it we need to analyze it from different perspectives to find 
answers to questions related to the data. Now, we’ve already used features such as filters and formulas to draw mathematical 
and logical conclusions about our data but not all questions can be answered easily using filters and formulas alone. 
In order to obtain usable and presentable insights into your data, you need something else… and that something else is Pivot Tables.
Pivot Tables provide a simple and quick way, in spreadsheets, to summarize and analyze data, to observe trends and patterns 
in your data and to make comparisons of your data. A Pivot Table is dynamic, so as you change and add data to the original 
dataset on which the Pivot Table is based, so the analysis and summary information changes too.

A Data Analyst can use Pivot Tables to draw useful and relevant conclusions about, and create insights into, 
an organization’s data in order to present those insights to interested parties within the company. 
Before you start to create a Pivot Table in Excel, it can be very helpful to first format your data as a table. 
The reason for this is not only to make it more organized and defined and to add table styles to your data, 
but primarily it makes it a lot easier when adding records to the dataset. In the car sales worksheet, 
let’s first select any cell within the data, and then on the Home tab, in the Styles group, choose ‘Format as Table’. 
Then, choose a style from the gallery. Note that Excel automatically knows the boundaries of our data range, 
but we can change this if we need to. And ensure you select ‘My table has headers’, if indeed it does.

After you click OK and the data has been formatted as a table, note the filter drop-downs at the top of 
each column – these are automatically added when you format as a table. If we now scroll down to the bottom of the table, 
and start adding another row of data for another vehicle, when you click Tab or Enter, note that it is automatically
formatted and included as part of our table. OK, now let’s see how to create a basic Pivot Table, and how to use fields
to arrange data in a Pivot Table. Just before we do that, there are a few things you should use as a checklist to ensure
your data is in a fit state to make a Pivot Table from, and these are: Format your data as a table for best results 
Ensure column headings are correct, and there is only one header row, as these column headings become the field names 
in a Pivot Table Remove any blank rows and columns, and try to eliminate blank cells also Ensure value fields are formatted
as numbers, and not text Ensure date fields are formatted as dates, and not text In the worksheet, we can just select any 
cell in the table. Then, on the Insert tab, we click PivotTable. Note that in the ‘Select a table or range’ box, 
the table name – Table1 – is already entered for us. If we hadn’t just formatted this data as a table, 
we would specify the cell range here instead.

Under that, we need to decide whether we want to create the Pivot Table on a separate new blank worksheet, 
or on this worksheet – a new worksheet is the default – and is the most commonly used option. 
So, a new blank worksheet opens, displaying some basic Pivot Table instructions in the graphic on the left of the worksheet,
and a ‘PivotTable Fields’ pane on the right. You can rename the worksheet for the Pivot Table if you wish. 
To build the Pivot Table report we need to add some fields from the top of the PivotTable Fields pane, 
to one or more of the sections in the bottom part of the pane. For example, if we want to find out the total sales 
for each model of car, let’s drag the Manufacturer field to the Rows section of the report, and then we’ll drag the Model 
field there too. But this isn’t really the way we want it to look, so we’ll drag the Manufacturer field to appear at the 
top of the Rows section above the Model, which makes more sense with our data. Next, we’ll add the Price field to the
Columns section, but again that really isn’t the way we want to view the data, so we’ll drag Price to the Values
section instead, which makes a lot more sense and looks a lot better.

Next, we’ll add the Unit Sales field to Values too, so now we can see both the individual price for each model and the 
number of unit sales of each model. Let’s add the Vehicle-type field to Columns, but that doesn’t seem very useful, 
so let’s remove that field, which we can do in two ways: Either by using the drop-down menu, or, if we undo that, 
we can also do it by simply dragging the field out of the Columns section, either to the left over the worksheet,
or to the top over the fields list above. Let’s now look at how to perform a simple calculation in a Pivot Table. 
If we look in the ‘Sum of Price’ column in our Pivot Table, we can see that the figures are formatted as General. 
So first, let’s change the format for these figures to US currency. This can be done by modifying the value field 
settings for the field in the relevant section of the PivotTable Fields pane. We’ll format the field as US dollars
and show no decimal places.

Next, we’ll add a calculated field from the ‘PivotTable Analyze’ tab, using the ‘Fields, Items & Sets’ button.
We want this field to calculate the total sales for each model by multiplying the price by the number of unit sales. 
When we create and add this formula, it gets added to the PivotTable Fields pane, as a field called Total Model Sales. 
And we can change the format to make it US dollars again. A new column called ‘Sum of Total Model Sales’ has now appeared in 
the Pivot Table in our worksheet. In row 5, we can see that there have been over 360 million dollars of sales of the Acura 
Integra model, and in row 7, we can see that there has been over a billion dollars in sales of the Acura TL model. 
we learned how to format data as a table, how to create a Pivot Table and use fields to analyze data in a Pivot Table, 
and how to perform calculations using Pivot Table data.

we’ll look at some other features of Pivot Tables.

Pivot Table Features

en
​
Interactive Transcript 
Now that we’ve learned how to create and use Pivot Tables in Excel, we’ll look at some other features that we can use with Pivot Tables,
including Recommended Pivot Tables, Filters, Slicers, and Timelines. Now that we’ve learned how to create and use Pivot Tables in Excel,
in this video we’ll look at some other features that we can use with Pivot Tables, including 
Recommended Pivot Tables, Filters, Slicers, and Timelines. First, let’s look at Recommended Pivot Tables,
which isn’t exactly a feature as such; it’s really more of a list of suggested different combinations of data that 
could be used when creating a Pivot Table. These recommendations are based on the data we select in the worksheet, 
and they are a great way to get started creating Pivot Tables if you don’t have much experience with them yet. 
For example, in the vehicle toy sales worksheet, if we select column B, which contains data about the quantity of 
items ordered, … when we choose Recommended Pivot Tables from the Insert tab, then we are presented with a list of 
potential data combinations related to the order quantity information. (3) However, if we select column F, which contains Order
Size information, then the recommended pivot table list changes to reflect that data. (6) And if we select column E, which
contains sales information, then the pivot tables recommended are related to sales data.

Let’s select the third one down, which is the sum of sales by territory; because that sounds like something we could get 
some useful insight from, by presenting it in a pivot table. Note that a new worksheet is opened containing the recommended
pivot table, and a new pane opens on the right, called PivotTable Fields. Let’s rename the worksheet to something more meaningful. 
In the PivotTable Fields pane, you can see that some fields have already been added to the Rows and Values areas. 
Although it’s a recommended pivot table, we can still make it our own, by adding more fields for example. 
So, let’s add the Productline item to the Columns area using drag and drop. Now we have columns for each of the product
lines in our pivot table, such as motorcycles, ships, and trains.

In the pivot table, we can manually expand any field we want to view its contents. Here we can see that the order dates 
are located underneath the territory names in our pivot table. Note that this matches the order of the fields in the Rows 
area of the PivotTable Fields pane. We can manually collapse each of the fields too. But we also have the option of 
expanding all the fields at once, … and collapsing them all too. The next feature we will delve into is pivot table 
filtering. Pivot table filters work in much the same way as the standard filters we used earlier in the course.

Note that we already have some in-built filtering in this pivot table. For example, the Row Labels header is a filter,
and we can filter on any of the listed territories, such as Japan. Just like standard filters, it’s very simple to clear
a filter in a pivot table. We also have a Column Labels filter, allowing us to filter on any of the productline items in
this pivot table; for example we could show data only for the trains product. (7) We also have the option of adding the
Productline field as a standard filter instead of a column heading, by dragging it to the Filters area in the PivotTable 
Fields pane. And we can then use it as a standard filter, as we have done earlier in this course. The filter also allows 
us to select multiple filter items.

But because it is now being used as a standard filter rather than a column header, we can’t see the split of the information 
on these two product lines; we just see a combined total. When we had the filter as a column header, the information on each 
product line was presented separately in each column. Let’s display all the field totals again. And we’ll drag the productline 
field back to the Columns area where it was previously, so we can see the split of our different product lines in the pivot table. 
The next pivot table feature we will look at are Slicers. Slicers are essentially on-screen graphical filter objects that enable
you to filter your data using buttons. Slicers make it easy to perform quick filtering of your pivot table data, and they also 
display the current filter state, making it easier for you to know, and see, what data is currently being shown, and which is 
being hidden, by the filter.

For example, if we remove the productline field from the pivot table by dragging it out of the PivotTable Fields pane, ... and then, 
from the PivotTable Analyze tab, we click Insert Slicer,... and then choose the Territory field as our slicer,… we can see that the 
slicer can be freely moved around anywhere on the worksheet, and it contains buttons for each of the territory items, such as EMEA,
North America, and Japan. We can also select the Multi-Select button to filter on multiple territories if we wish. We can click the 
Clear Filter button to clear all slicer filters. Let’s add another slicer to our worksheet for the productline field. However, 
be sure to select a cell in the pivot table first, because if you don’t, then the insert slicer button won’t work. Note that slicers 
can also be added from the Filters group on the Insert tab as well as from the PivotTable Analyze tab. We’ll select the Productline 
field this time for our slicer, and drag it near the top of the worksheet.

As before, we can select only one slicer item, or we can turn on Multi-Select and choose several items to filter on in the slicer. 
Then let’s clear the slicer filters, … and now let’s filter using both slicers. Note that when you use multi-select filtering,
when you select an item, you are in fact filtering it out; that is, you are defining which items will NOT be displayed in the
pivot table. This is the opposite behavior to when you are selecting single items in a slicer. So now we are displaying only 
‘classic cars’, ‘trains’, and ‘trucks and buses’ products for the EMEA and North America territories. 
Now let’s clear those slicer filters, and put the productline field back in the Columns area of the pivot table,
so it’s ready for the next feature we will explore. And let’s move these slicers out of the way, further down the worksheet.

The last useful feature for pivot tables we are going to look at, is Timelines. A Timeline is another type of filter
tool that enables you to filter specifically on date-related data in your pivot table. This is a much quicker and more 
effective way of dynamically filtering by date, rather than having to create and adjust filters on your date columns. 
We can add a Timeline for our pivot table either from the PivotTable Analyze tab, or from the Insert tab. 
Again, ensure you select any cell in the pivot table first. We’ll select the Orderdate field as our Timeline filter.
Then we can drag it up the worksheet and enlarge it.

The default for this timeline is to display data by month, but you can also filter by days, … or by quarters. 
You can select a single quarter; or you can select a range of quarters. In this case, we’ll select twelve months between 
quarter 3 of 2003 and quarter 2 of 2004. You use the Clear Filter button to clear a timeline filter. You can also filter by years. 
For example, here we have selected 2003 only. And you can combine slicers and timelines as filters in a pivot table.

For example, here we can filter the slicers to display only data for trains, in the EMEA and North America territories, 
and only in the year 2003. And if we filter on the year 2004 instead, you’ll see that there is no data being displayed; 
meaning that there were no sales of train products in 2004 in either the EMEA or the North America territories. 
(15) Timelines and Slicers have their own tabs in the ribbon when you select them, and their properties can be modified to 
change how they look and how they work. For example, let’s change this Timeline to a light green shade, … and let’s change
this Slicer to a nice orange color. And lastly, to remove a timeline or slicer, you can either select it and press
the Delete key, … or right-click it and choose Cut. we learned about some of the other features in 
Excel that we can use with Pivot Tables, namely; Recommended Pivot Tables, Filters, Slicers, and Timelines.

Summary and Highlights
In this lesson, you have learned the following information: 

Pivot Tables:

To obtain usable and presentable insights into your data you need to use Pivot Tables. 
Pivot tables provide a simple and quick way to summarize and analyze data, to observe trends and patterns 
in your data and to make comparisons of your data. 

Pivot tables are dynamic, so as you change and add data to the original dataset on which the pivot table is 
based, the analysis and summary information changes too. 

A Data Analyst can use pivot tables to draw useful and relevant conclusions about, and create insights into,
an organization’s data in order to present those insights to interested parties within the company. 

Use this Pivot Table checklist to ensure your data is in a fit state to make a Pivot Table: 
Format your data as a table for best results.
Ensure column headings are correct, and there is only one header row, as these column headings become 
the field names in a Pivot Table.
Remove any blank rows and columns, and try to eliminate blank cells also.
Ensure value fields are formatted as numbers, and not text, and ensure date fields are formatted as dates, and not text.
Arranging Pivot Tables with Filters and Recommended Tables:
You use the Pivot Table Fields pane to add and arrange data fields in your pivot table. 
Recommended Pivot Tables are a list of suggested different combinations of data that could be used when creating a Pivot Table, 
based on the data selected in the worksheet. 

Filters and Slicers:
Slicers are on-screen graphical filter objects that enable you to filter your data using buttons, which makes it easier
to perform quick filtering of your pivot table data. 
Timelines are another type of filter tool that enable you to filter specifically on date-related data in your pivot table. 
This is a much quicker and more effective way of dynamically filtering by date, rather than having to create and adjust 
filters on your date columns. 



Question 1
Before creating a pivot table, how should you format your data? 
A. As a table

Question 2
How can you add more filters to the pivot table?
A. Drag a field to the Filters area of the PivotTable Fields pane

Question 3
What must you do first before adding another slicer to a pivot table?
A. Select a cell in the pivot table

Question 4
Which of the following features in Excel provides suggested combinations of data for creating Pivot Tables based on the selected data?
A. Recommended Pivot Tables



Question 1
What should you remove before making a Pivot Table?
Blank rows, columns, and cells 
Value fields and row labels 
Row labels, columns, data fields 
Date fields, value fields, and cells 


Question 2
What is automatically added after formatting data as a table?
Column headers at the top of columns 
Data bars presented at the top
Filter drop-downs at the top of columns
Alternate light/dark rows at the bottom 


Question 3
After creating a pivot table and selecting it, what pane appears to the right of the pivot table? 
The PivotTable Properties pane 
The PivotTable Metadata pane
The PivotTable Fields pane
Additional pivot table examples 


Question 4
What do Timelines provide in pivot tables?
Preview views of different filters
Provide details of all actions performed during a given period 
Let you filter specifically on date-related data 
Set the pivot table to an earlier view


Question 5
What is one way to remove a slicer or timeline?
Right-click it and select cut 
Create a new one 
Remove all filters from the pivot table 
Press CTRL+Z 

