Course Introduction

This Excel knowledge gives you a good grounding in the cleaning and analyzing of 
data which are important parts of the skill set required to become a data analyst. 
In module one we will learn about the basics of spreadsheets:
1. spreadsheet terminology, 
2. The interface - navigating around worksheets 
3. workbooks

In module two we will learn about 
1. selecting data
2. entering an editing data 
3. copying and auto filling data
4. formatting data
5. functions and formulas. 

In module three we will learn about cleaning and wrangling data using a spreadsheet, including 
1. the fundamentals of data quality and data privacy, 
2. removing duplicated and inaccurate data,
3. removing empty rows, 
4. removing data inconsistencies and white spaces
5. The flash fill and text to columns features. 

In module four we will learn about analyzing data using spreadsheets, including 
1. filtering data, 
2. sorting data, 
3. common data analysis functions, creating 
4. pivot tables, and creating
5. slicers and timelines.


Introduction to Spreadsheets
we will list some of the common spreadsheet applications available, learn about the key capabilities of spreadsheets, and 
discuss why spreadsheets might be a useful tool for a Data Analyst. 

There are several spreadsheet applications available in the marketplace; 
some of them are more widely known and used than others, 
and some are free, while others need to be paid for.
By far the most commonly used spreadsheet application, and the most fully featured of them all is Microsoft Excel.
The desktop version comes in a paid form as part of the Office suite and some Microsoft 365 subscriptions, 
but there is also a web-based cut-down version called Excel for the web, also known as Excel Online. 
The online version is free to users with a Microsoft account, but does not offer all the advanced features that 
the desktop version provides.
The next most popular is Google Sheets, which offers a lot, though not all of the features that Excel provides, 
and is free with a Google account. This is a web-based application and it integrates nicely with other Google apps, 
such as Google Forms, Google Analytics, and Google Data Studio.

Then there is LibreOffice Calc, a totally free and open source desktop spreadsheet application that offers more basic 
functionality than Excel or Google Sheets, but still has a lot of the tools you need for data analysis, 
such as charts, conditional formatting, and pivot tables. Other spreadsheet apps include Zoho Sheet
(a fully-featured web-based application that is comparable with Google Sheets), OpenOffice Calc, Quip from Salesforce, 
Smartsheet (which is predominantly for project management), and Apple Numbers, (which is included with Apple devices 
such as Mac computers and is also available on the App Store for other Apple devices). So, there are many spreadsheet 
application options open to you, from fully-featured to basic, from cloud-based to desktop apps, from paid-for to free versions. 
It’s up to you to decide which one best fits your needs and your budget. Spreadsheets provide several advantages over manual 
calculation methods. For example, once you have your formulas correctly written, you can be assured that your calculations
are accurate, and that the calculations will be performed automatically for you. Spreadsheets also help keep your data organized
and easily accessible.

Your data can be easily formatted, filtered, and sorted to suit your needs. If you do make mistakes in your data entry or your
calculations you can easily edit them, undo them, or use error-checking tools to help remedy those mistakes.
And lastly, you can analyze data in spreadsheets, and create charts, graphs, and reports to help visualize your data analysis.
Since spreadsheet software for personal computers first appeared on the market in the 1970s, with VisiCalc on the Apple II PC, 
spreadsheets have come a long way in terms of the capabilities and features they now offer businesses, from uncomplicated tables
and relatively simple computations to powerful tools for the analysis, management, and visualization of enormous sets of data. 
The most common business uses for spreadsheet applications include the following: Data Entry and Storage, Comparing Large Datasets,
Modelling and Planning, Charting, Identifying Trends, Flowcharts for Business Processes, Tracking Business Sales, Financial 
Forecasting, Statistical Analysis, Profit and Loss Accounting, Budgeting, Forensic Auditing, Payroll and Tax Reporting, 
Invoicing, and Scheduling. And away from the business side of things, other typical uses include Personal Expenses,
Household Budgeting, Recipe library, Fitness Tracking, Calorie Counting & Weight Monitoring, Sports Leagues such as Fantasy
Football, Cataloging Music Libraries, and even Contact Lists, Shopping Lists and Christmas Card Lists. As a Data Analyst, 
you can use spreadsheets as a tool for your data analysis tasks, including: Collecting and harvesting data from one or more
distributed and different sources.

Cleaning data to remove duplicates, inaccuracies, errors, and resolve missing values to improve the quality of the data.
Analyzing data by filtering, sorting, and interpreting it to determine what useful information can be gleaned from it. 
And visualizing data, to help you tell a story about your data analysis findings to key business stakeholders and any
other interested parties within your organization. In this video, we had an introduction to spreadsheets. 
We learned about some common spreadsheet applications, what the main capabilities of spreadsheets are, and why 
spreadsheets might be a useful tool for a Data Analyst. 


Spreadsheet Basics 

Now that we have a basic understanding of what spreadsheet software is available, 
and why spreadsheets might be a useful tool for a Data Analyst, let’s get started on looking at some of the
basics of using a spreadsheet application. we will be using the full ‘desktop’ version of Excel, 
but the majority of the tasks that we will perform can also be done using Excel ‘on the web’, also known as Excel Online,
and other spreadsheet applications such as Google Sheets. Let’s first cover some basic spreadsheet terminology. 
When you open Excel, you have the option of creating a new blank workbook or opening an existing workbook. 
We’re going to choose New, and then Blank workbook. Workbooks are the highest-level component in Excel and
are represented as a .XLSX file.

So, when you open an existing workbook or create a new workbook you are in fact working with a .XLSX file.
The workbook contains all your data, calculations, and functions, and contains several other underlying elements that
make up a workbook. A workbook consists of one or more worksheets, each of which is represented by a tab in Excel. 
Each worksheet is given a name which is displayed on the corresponding tab for the worksheet. 
By default, each tab is named Sheet1, then Sheet2, and so on. To make these worksheet tabs more meaningful it is usual
to rename them, so they make more sense in relation to the worksheet’s purpose.
For example, you might call a worksheet January Sales, or perhaps the name of a region or store, or even an office or department. 
To do this, right-click the tab and choose Rename. Instead of right-clicking to rename, you can also just double-click 
the name of a worksheet tab to rename it. Essentially, worksheet tabs can be named anything you want to fit your 
particular needs to make it easier to understand what that worksheet represents.
Note that a worksheet that is highlighted, as the Tire Sales worksheet tab is here, is referred to as the active worksheet. 
If you want to order your worksheets in a different way, that is very simple to do. Either drag a worksheet tab to the left or 
right and drop it in the place you want, which is represented by the little black arrow, or if you are not comfortable 
with dragging and dropping, then the longer way of doing that is to right-click the worksheet tab, 
select Move or Copy, and then in the list titled Before sheet, select where you want your worksheet tab to be placed, and click OK.

Every worksheet is made up of a lot of rectangular boxes called cells. These cells will contain your data, which may be text,
numbers, formulas, or calculation results. Cells are organized in columns, which run vertically down the screen and 
use a letter system; this is column B for instance. And rows, which run horizontally across the screen and use a numeric system; 
this is row 7 for example. Each cell is represented by a cell reference which is essentially just its column letter and row number. 
For example, if we click somewhere near the center of this worksheet, we now have the cell M20 selected. 
This is usually referred to as the ‘active cell’.

This is not only indicated by the highlighted edges of the cell but also if you look in the top left corner of the worksheet, 
you will see its cell reference is noted in the little box. Here you can see it says M20. One important thing to note here is 
that cells are always referenced by their column letter first then their row number; so, column M, and row 20. 
The last element of a workbook I want to mention is a cell range. This identifies a collection of several cells selected together;
that could mean a few cells in the same row or the same column, or it could mean several rows and columns together. 
This can either be done using the mouse by selecting the first cell then ‘dragging’ down or across to include other cells; 
or you can use SHIFT+ arrow keys. This range of cells is often referred to as an array, and it’s most commonly used as a 
reference in calculations and formulas.
For example, if you wanted to add up all the values in a column between cells D9 and D19 you would specify this cell range
within a formula. Note that cell ranges are notated using a full colon (:) between the cell references; 
so, in this example it would be D9:D19, or to specify a few cells in the same row it might be D9:H9, 
or to select several rows and columns it might be D9:H19. We will see this notation in use later in this course 
when we start looking at calculations and formulas. These cell ranges could even be a reference point to cells contained 
on another worksheet; this is usually referred to as a 3D reference. We can now close this workbook and we don’t need to save it.
we learned about some of the basic terminology of spreadsheet elements. we will discuss how to navigate around a spreadsheet, 
how to use the ribbon and menus, and how to select data.


Now that we have a basic understanding of the main elements that make up a worksheet,
let’s see how to move around a spreadsheet, get familiar with the ribbon and menus, and learn how to select data in a worksheet.
To open a sample file, we click File. This opens Backstage View. Here you can create a new workbook, or open, save or print a workbook. 
You can also access Excel Options. Now, we want to open our sample file. So, we click Open, and either select it from my Recent list,
or click Browse to find the data file we want.

The first thing we should do is get acquainted with the ribbon and menus. Notice that on the ribbon at the top we have several tabs.
Some of these tabs may be familiar to you from other Office products, such as the Home, Insert, and View tabs, while others 
might be new to you, such as Formulas, Data, and Power Pivot. To make a little more workspace for ourselves we can hide 
this ribbon by double-clicking any tab, and to unhide it, we do the same. The other option is to use the shortcut key CTRL+F1.
The ribbon is organized into groups of buttons to make them easier to find. So, on the Home tab we have groups for
Font, Alignment, Number, Styles, and so on.

Some of these groups contain all the available buttons on the ribbon when viewing in full screen, 
such as Styles and Cells, but other ribbon groups have more options, which we access by clicking the little
arrow icon in the bottom right corner of the group, as can be seen here on the Number group for example. 
The next item I want to point out is the Quick Access Toolbar at the top of the screen above the ribbon.
As the name suggests this is where you can quickly access the tools you use most often. You can see we already have some 
tools in this toolbar such as Save, Undo, Redo, New, and Open. But we can add other tools to the toolbar if we wish. 
So if we click the drop-down arrow in the toolbar and then select a tool we will use a lot, such as Sort Ascending, 
that will be added, and we will also add the Sort Descending button too. Now we need to be comfortable with moving around a worksheet.

You can simply use the arrow keys to move left, right, up, and down 1 cell at a time. But you can also use Page Down
and Page Up to move around a bit faster, which is especially useful if you have lots of rows of data.
And to move even quicker up or down a large datasheet use the vertical scroll bar, and to move left or right use 
the horizontal scroll bar. Again, these can be very useful when you have a large data set. There are also some useful 
shortcuts you can use. CTRL+Home key for example takes you back to the start of the worksheet (i.e. cell A1). 
CTRL+End takes you to the cell at the end of your data in the worksheet.

CTRL+Down arrow takes you to the end of the column you’re in, while CTRL+Up arrow takes you back to the top of that column. 
So a quick way to find out how many rows of data you have in your worksheet is to go to the first cell in your data and press 
CTRL+Down arrow to see the last row of data. So here you can see we have 160 rows. Now how do we go back to the top again? 
CTRL+Home will do it. So far, we have seen how to navigate around our worksheet and its data, now we need to look at how we 
select data. This is very important because you often need to select data to move it, copy it, or select it in a formula.

The simplest selection is a single cell, usually done with a mouse or maybe a directional arrow key. 
The next step up is to select multiple cells together, and this can be done either with a mouse by dragging from one cell 
to additional adjoining cells, or you can use the SHIFT key with directional arrow keys. Next up is selecting a single 
column or row which is done simply by selecting the letter at the top of a column, or the number on the left of a row. 
Then we can progress to selecting multiple columns and rows, by clicking the mouse button, holding it down and dragging
across more columns. Or if you are not comfortable with dragging you can also select the column first, 
then hold SHIFT+Arrow keys to select multiple columns. The same applies to rows too. However, if you have data in 
non-contiguous rows or columns (i.e. not next to each other) you can select the first column, then use the CTRL key 
to select another unconnected column, such as columns C and F here.

The largest thing you might want to select is the whole worksheet which you can do by clicking in the top left corner of the cells. 
However, this selects the entire worksheet including all the empty rows and columns; so if you only want the data in your worksheet, 
you can use the shortcut CTRL+A. A word of warning when selecting data in cells, rows, and columns; there are 3 types of cross 
symbols that you might see when working with selected cells. The first one is the large white cross that you see when you select a 
cell as can be seen here in cell A4, this is the Select cross that we have been using already in this video to select cells. 
The second type you might see is when you hover over the bottom edge of a cell and see a thin black cross-type symbol with arrows 
on each point…. this is the Move symbol and would move the cell data to another location. The last type is the small thin black 
cross that is seen when you hover over the bottom right corner of a cell; this is the Fill Handle or Copy symbol and it fills 
(or copies) the cell data to another location. In this video, we learned how to move around a spreadsheet, became familiar with 
the ribbon and menus, and learned how to select data in a worksheet.

we will discuss how to enter data, how to copy and paste data, and how to format data in a spreadsheet.
