Cleaning and Wraggling the data using spreadsheet

Introduction to Data Quality

Data analysis can play a pivotal role in business decisions and processes. In order to use the data to make confident decisions, 
we must have the right information for the project and the data must be free from errors. 
we will learn how to profile data to discover inconsistencies. Whether we are working with small sets of data or analyzing 
a spreadsheet with thousands of rows, one of the most difficult parts of the data analysis is finding and keeping clean data.
To help with this process and qualify the data, look for these five traits: Accuracy, Completeness, Reliability, Relevance and Timeliness.
Accuracy is the first and most significant aspect to data quality. A data analyst must clean the data set by removing duplicates, 
correcting formatting errors, and removing blank rows.

Another important aspect of data quality is determining if the information required to complete the data set is readily available. 
Why does this matter as a trait for quality data? Let’s say we are given the task to calculate the revenues of all sales per region. 
After collecting the data, we discover that no regions were specified. This data would then be considered incomplete and other 
sources would have to be considered to obtain the data required. Reliability is another vital factor in determining the quality 
of the data. For instance, let’s say we are given the task to determine the agent revenue by customer.

When gathering the data, we find the agents keep their own records and do not always update the information in the shared company 
database. With those factors in mind, we would then determine that the data in the shared company database was unreliable and
new processes would need to be established to ensure reliable data. Relevance is another trait of quality data.
When collecting information, a data analyst must consider if the data being assembled is really necessary for the project. 
For example, when reviewing the data related to the sales revenue per customer, information such as customer 
birthdays and other personal information is also included. By making the determination early to exclude the personal
information from the data set, the analyst would save themselves from having to review unnecessary information.
The last factor in determining the quality of the data is timeliness.

This trait refers to the availability and accessibility of the selected data. Let’s say our sales report is going to be used
for weekly employee reviews, but our report is only refreshed once a month. This error in refreshing the data would 
cause our report to become outdated, and would have serious consequences for employee reviews. In this video we learned the 
important role of a data analyst in qualifying data. By considering the five traits of good quality data, an analyst can save time, 
avoid serious issues, and have data that is free from errors. we will take the collected data and learn how to 
import it to our spreadsheet.


Importing File Data

Now that you have learned about the importance of data quality, now you will learn how to import data from a text file using 
the Text Import Wizard, learn how to adjust column widths, and learn how to add and remove columns and rows. As you know,
by default Excel works with .xlsx or .xls files and opens them as workbooks. But Excel can also use data that is in other 
formats, such as plain text, or data that has been comma-separated and tab-separated. Sometimes, these source files will be 
saved with a .txt extension and referred to as ‘text’ files, but others might be saved with a .CSV file extension, 
and are typically referred to as CSV files. Here in Notepad, I have opened a text file that contains data about car sales,
and it uses comma separated values (or CSVs) to separate each bit of data in a record. Notice that the top line holds headings,
such as Manufacturer, Model, Engine_size, and so on, and each one is separated by a comma.

We want these to become our headers when we import the file into Excel. The line below these headings is the first line of real
data, and again you can see that each piece of data is also separated by a comma. There are 16 headings and there are also 
16 pieces of data on each of the lines below the headings. If we scroll to the bottom, we can see that last data record is 
for the Volvo S80. Now, to open the file in Excel, we choose File, Open, and then either select the file from the recently used list,
or click Browse to find the file we want to import. When we open the file, the Text Import Wizard launches automatically, 
and it will start to try and determine what your file is. Note that it has been detected as being a delimited file; that is, 
one that has its data fields separated by a character such as a comma or a tab.

As we want the headings to become headers in Excel, we need to ensure that we select the option ‘My data has headers’. 
We can see a mini preview of the data in the preview box below. Then we click Next to proceed in the wizard. 
In step 2 of the wizard, we need to select our delimiter; that is, which character is separating our pieces of data; 
so we select Comma, and deselect any others. Note the data preview now starts to show us what the imported data will look like. 
You can scroll down and across this preview window to ensure that the data is going to look as you want and expect.
It all looks OK, so we’ll continue with the wizard.

In step 3 of the wizard, we can set the data format for each column. For example, you might want to change a column to
Text or Date format. In this case we can just accept the default General format, and finish the import wizard.
In Excel we can see that the headings in the text file have been imported as a header row. But also notice that some of
the columns are not showing all the data; some of the headings are not showing in full and some of the data is not shown 
either; all you can see are a number of hashes in the cells. This is because the column widths are too narrow in some cases. 
If you remember, we can manually adjust a column’s width by dragging the divider across.

But to change them all in one go, we select all the columns first, then double-click one of the selected column dividers. 
We can do a similar thing with rows by dragging to make them bigger or smaller, or double-clicking a row divider to autosize it.
There are some columns that we have decided we don’t really need; namely Vehicle_type and Latest_Launch, so let’s remove those.
This can either be done using the Delete drop-down menu in the Cells group on the Home tab, and select Delete Sheet Columns,
or by selecting and right-clicking a column and deleting it that way. To add another column, you simply select the column to 
right of where you want your new column to be, then right-click the column and choose Insert. And let’s give the header a name, 
such as Year. To delete a row you don’t need, select the row, right-click it, and choose Delete.

And to add a row, select the row below the place you want to add your new row, right-click the row, and choose Insert. 
If you want to save the file as an Excel file, you can either choose File, Save As, or you can click Save As in the yellow
tooltip that appeared at the top of the worksheet when we imported the file, and then you would choose ‘Excel Workbook (*.xlsx)’
in the ‘Save as type’ box. In this video, we learned how to import data using the Text Import Wizard, we learned how to adjust 
column widths, and we learned how to add and remove columns and rows. we will discuss the importance of data
privacy, including sensitive information, and personally identifiable data.


Basics of Data Privacy

we will learn about data privacy and the regulations that govern the collected data. When collecting customer data, 
specific regulations apply to how that data can used. By understanding data privacy regulations and getting familiar
with the following three fundamentals, you can eliminate the risk of financial penalties and keep the trust of your customers. 
Confidentiality, Collection and Use, and Compliance. 
Confidentiality is an important element in data privacy and it acknowledges that the customer’s personal information belongs to them. 
The types of information that can be accessed by a data analyst can range from sales forecasts, to employee information,
or even patient records. When accessing these types of records the analyst must be able to recognize the different 
types of personal data.

Personal Information or PI is any type of information that can be traced back to a specific individual. 
This type of information can include anything from emails to images. Personally Identifiable Information or 
PII is specific information that could be used to identify an individual. This type of information could include a 
social security number or a driver’s license number. And lastly , Sensitive Personal Information or SPI, may not
necessarily identify a specific individual, but contains private information that needs to be protected because if
made public it could possibly be use to harm the individual . The type of information can include data about race,
sexual orientation, biometric or genetic information. By understanding personal data and the associated regulations, 
we can efficiently anonymize our data by removing unnecessary information.

This type of action can help build consumer confidence and continue to develop the free flow of information.
When searching through data, the analyst must know the location of the company collecting the data and the location of the respondent.
Knowing where the data was collected is an essential element of data privacy and what regulations must be applied.
The General Data Protection Regulation or GDPR is a regulation specific to the European Union, and only applies 
to the jurisdiction of the individual. A new law created in Brazil, the LGPD, will take effect in August 2020. 
These new data policy regulations apply to individuals within Brazil, and ignores the location of the data processor. 
While the United States does not have one country-wide principle law for data privacy. Because of this individual 
states began to make their own regulations. For instance, California created the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) 
to better protect customer data. There are also industry specific regulations that govern the collection and use of 
sensitive and personal data. For example, in Healthcare, HIPAA privacy rules govern the collection and disclosure of 
protected health information.

In retail, the PCI standards govern credit card data, and failure to safeguard cardholder information can result in hefty fines.
With a basic understanding of these policies, we are able to remain compliant when handling any sensitive information.
Unfortunately, breeches in customer data is an all too common occurrence and understanding how to remain compliant is essential. 
Understanding the data privacy regulations of the European Union, the United States, and other countries as well as 
industries is key to keeping data safe. Companies must comply with these privacy regulations at all times and also make 
sure policies are readily accessible to employees. For example, let’s say a data analyst downloads a spreadsheet of 
sensitive information. In order to complete the report by Monday morning, the analyst decided to take their work laptop home
for the weekend. After driving home, the analyst accidently left the laptop in their car. The next morning, 
they found their car had been stolen along with the laptop. Because it is the responsibility of the company to keep customer data 
safe, this was a breach of privacy when the data left company property.

This type of action could not only cost the company large amounts of money in fines and penalties, but could also reduce
consumer confidence causing a significant impact to revenue. While data privacy applies to most data that is collected, 
there are some instances where these regulations do not apply. In order for these laws and regulations not to apply,
the particular collection of data must be completely anonymous. To make data anonymous means to exclude all data which 
ties it back to a particular individual. While this approach might not be practical in all circumstances, collecting data 
with privacy in mind could remove privacy limitations and make data collections more accessible. In this video we learned 
about the importance of data privacy and the challenges that a data analyst can face when collecting and sorting through data. 
we will learn about different methods for cleaning data in a spreadsheet.
: Added to Selection. Press [CTRL + S] to save as a note


Summary and Highlights
In this lesson, you have learned the following information:
The Five Traits of Data Quality: 
Accuracy 
Completeness 
Reliability 
Relevance 
Timeliness 

Importing Text: You can use the ‘Text Import Wizard’ to import data from other formats, such as plain text, 
or comma-separated value files. 

The Three Fundamentals of Data Privacy: 
Confidentiality 
Collection and Use 
Compliance 


Question 1
 What are the fundamental principles of data privacy mentioned? (Select all that apply.)  
A. Collection and Use  
 Confidentiality  

Question 2
Which of the following are the essential traits of quality data? Select all that apply.
A. Timeliness
   Completeness
   Accuracy

Question 3
Why is it important to ensure the reliability of data?
A. To avoid basing decisions on outdated or incorrect information. 

Question 4
Which of the following steps is included in the process for importing data from a text file using the Text Import Wizard in Excel? Select all that apply.
A. Indicate whether your data has headers.
Select the delimiter that separates the data fields.
Set the data format for each column.

Question 5
What is the primary responsibility of a company when it comes to data privacy?
A. To ensure that customer data is kept safe and complies with privacy regulations. 


Question 1
Which data quality trait can be summarized by asking if the data is really necessary? 
A. Relevance 

Question 2
Which data quality trait refers to the availability and accessibility of the data?
A. Timeliness 

Question 3
After importing a text file into Excel, you find some columns aren't showing all data. How can you fix all column widths at the same time?
A. Drag a divider across 
Select all columns and double-click one of the selected column dividers 
Click the Format button 
Shorten the text so it fits 


Removing Duplicated or Inaccurate Data and Empty Rows

Now that we have learned about the importance of data quality and data privacy, we will learn how to deal with inaccurate data,
how to remove empty rows, and how to remove duplicated data. It’s very common when collecting or
importing data - whether through manual or automated processes - to get errors and inconsistencies in your data.
This can be as simple as spelling mistakes, extra white space, or the wrong case used in text, to empty rows or 
missing values in your data, to inaccurate or duplicated data. Having these errors and inconsistencies in your data can lead 
to issues with formulas not working, with unsuccessful sorting and filtering operations and therefore inadequately visualized
and presented data findings. These data errors and inconsistencies require you to carry out some form of data-cleaning routine 
to improve the quality and usability of the data. Let’s start off with one of the easier of those tasks, which is spell checking. 
In Excel, this works in pretty much the same way as you may have already encountered in applications such as Microsoft Word or 
other common word processing applications.

I have some data here relating to the sales of toy vehicles, and the first thing we need to do is select what data we wish
to check for spelling; in this case we will try column K which contains the product line data. Then we click Spelling which
is on the Review tab. Well that seems to be OK, so let’s try the Country information in column T. So, we do have an error here,
where a country name has been misspelt, or more likely, mistyped. We just click Change if we are happy with the spelling suggestion, 
or we could choose another suggestion from the list, or even ignore this error if we know the data is correct, 
but in this case we will change it. Here’s another typo for a country name and here’s one more. 
So, that seems to be all the errors in this column, let’s try the final column now which is the deal size in column X.

Here is a misspelling of the word small and another for medium. And that seems to be all for this column. 
The next inconsistency we will look for is empty rows. Empty rows in your data can cause lots of issues relating
to moving around your data, working with formulas, and sorting and filtering. Therefore, it’s very important to 
remove them from your data. If you remember from an earlier lesson, when we click CTRL+DOWN ARROW, it should take 
us to the end of that column of data, but notice if we do that in this dataset, the cursor keeps stopping when it 
gets to an empty row meaning that the dataset if essentially being split into multiple sections, separated by these empty rows.
That’s not good, so let’s resolve that now.

We have a couple of options; one option is to just manually scroll down the sheet looking for empty rows and deleting each one,
which is easy enough, and fine to do if you only have a small amount of data, but imagine if you were dealing with hundreds,
or thousands, or even tens of thousands of rows? That would be a very laborious and time-consuming process. 
There is a much better way - which involves selecting all our data first, either using the mouse, 
or the CTRL+SHIFT+END keyboard shortcut. Then we select the Filter icon on the Data tab.
We can now see that each column has a filter icon next to the column header. If we then select the Customer Name column-filter
in column M then uncheck Select All then scroll down to the bottom of the list, we can check the item called Blanks, 
and then click OK. This will now show only the empty rows at the top of our sheet; this can be quite hard to see,
but if you look in the row numbers, you can see that rows 28,29,65,73,74,75 and 117 are listed at the top and are
highlighted in blue text.

We can now select these rows, either using the mouse or going to the first cell in the first data row, which is A28, 
and then using the CTRL+SHIFT+END keyboard shortcut then delete the offending empty rows. We then need to clear the filter 
and turn it off, so we can view our data again. Now, if we go back to the first row in the top of the datasheet and try the
CTRL+DOWN shortcut again, to go to the end of the data column, it will work. The next inconsistency we’ll look for is 
duplicated rows of data; it’s quite common for duplicate data rows to exist in your imported data, caused either by 
human input error, or an error in the import process. There are two ways of doing this in Excel; the first way includes 
reviewing the data you plan to remove first, before deleting it, to ensure you are deleting the right data. 
This is our preferred method as it provides an additional level of data security. The second method, 
which we will also show you, is simpler, as you don’t review the data to be removed first, but it lacks the security of the 
first method.

It’s important to select a column of data that you would NOT expect to have duplicate values in. For example, if we consider 
the Price Each column, which is C, we would expect lots of these values to be repeated, because the unit price of some products
is the same, so this is a bad example of a column to use to find duplicates. Instead, let’s use the Sales column in column E,
because it is far less likely that these values will be duplicated in the normal process of things, as they are the total sales 
for each order. So, we select the column…and choose Conditional Formatting, then Highlight Cells Rules, and then Duplicate Values. 
When we click OK, and scroll down the sheet, we can see that only a few values have been identified as being duplicates. 
There seem to be duplicate values in rows 36 to 40 and in rows 74 to 78 Let’s zoom out so we can see both duplicate sections together. 
It seems like these are in fact exact duplicate entries, and are likely to be an input error.

Let’s delete the second section of duplicate rows as they are out of sequence; as they relate to Motorcycles sales and are in the
Ships section of the sheet. So that was the first, and recommended method of removing duplicate rows of data, which previews the 
data to be removed first. Now, let’s try the second, simpler, but less secure method. Let’s go back to 100% zoom, and go back to 
the top of the worksheet. This time, we select the whole datasheet, and on the Data tab, we use the Remove Duplicates button. 
We then unselect all the columns, then only select the Sales column. And the duplicate rows are deleted.

The last cleaning process we’ll look at in this video is using the Find & Replace feature to repair some misspelt surnames in 
the customer contacts column. Find and Replace tools are under Find & Select on the Home tab in Excel, and if you have used other
Office products such as Word, it should be familiar to you already. We’ve had an email from a Swedish customer, informing us that
we have his surname spelt incorrectly on his order sheets. So, we type the misspelt surname in to the ‘Find what’ box and 
click Find Next, then click it again to see there are multiple incorrect entries. If we click Find All, all instances are listed,
and we can open the Replace tab to enter a name to replace the incorrect spellings. His surname should be Larsson with a double ‘s’, 
so we’ll replace all instances with that corrected spelling. That looks better, and we are finished.

we learned how to deal with inaccurate data, how to remove empty rows, and how to remove duplicated data. 
we will look at changing the case of text, fixing date formatting errors, and trimming whitespace from data.


Dealing with Inconsistencies in Data

we’ve learned how to deal with inaccurate data, how to remove empty rows, and how to remove duplicated data,
we’ll look at changing the case of text, fixing date formatting errors, and trimming whitespace from data. 
When you collect or receive data from varying sources, it’s quite common to find that your data contains text in mixed case; 
that is, some in uppercase, some in lowercase and some in capitalized proper case (also known as sentence case).
Some of this may be intentional; but often it’s not. Excel doesn’t have a Change Case button like there is in Microsoft Word,
so you need to use other methods to perform this data cleaning task. Those methods are functions; 
namely the UPPER, LOWER, and PROPER functions. You can use these functions to help you change the case of text in your data. 
You can see that the header row here is using all uppercase characters, so if you want to change that to use proper case then 
you need to add another row to put the function in; this is referred to as a ‘helper’ row.

The PROPER function is simple to use; just type equals, then PROPER, then open parenthesis,
then the cell reference - In this case A1 - then close parenthesis, and press Enter. Here you can see that the result in A2
is in proper case. Now you can try and drag the formula right across to column X by using the Fill Handle on A2...
but this can be very tricky when you have a lot of columns, so let’s try another way. Instead of dragging, 
you can use SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW to select the columns across to X first then press F2 to bring the cursor into focus in cell A2
then you hold down the CTRL key while you press Enter, and it fills across for you. You might think that you could now remove 
the original row; but look what happens when you do; you get a REF error because the formula is referencing an invalid reference, 
and the header row cells now contain just the failed formula rather than the actual header text. So, you need to undo that, 
and instead, you copy the contents of the helper row to row 1 but when you paste you need to choose the Paste Values option.
Now the header row cells just contain header text, and you can remove the helper row in row 2.

Let’s now use the UPPER function to change text from proper case to upper case. Insert a column to the right of the column
you want to change. This will be a ‘helper’ column. Then you type the formula containing the UPPER function in 
the first data cell in this new helper column. Again, it’s a simple formula; you type equals, then UPPER, then open parenthesis, 
then the cell reference – in this case T2 – and then close parenthesis and press Enter You can see the result is 
the country name in upper case, and you can then copy that formula down the rest of the column by double-clicking 
the Fill Handle cross symbol. As before, you then copy and paste the contents of the helper column to the original column,
but use the Paste Values option. Now you can delete the helper column Next, we’ll use the LOWER function to change 
text from proper case to lower case.

As before, you insert a column to the right of the column you want to change. This will be another ‘helper’ column.
Then you type the formula containing the LOWER function in the first data cell in the helper column. Once again,
it’s a very simple formula; you type equals, then LOWER, then open parenthesis, 
then the cell reference – in this case K2 – and then close parenthesis, and press Enter You can see the result is the product 
line data in lower case, and you can now copy the formula down to the rest of the column by double-clicking the Fill Handle once more.
As before, you then copy and paste the contents of the helper column to the original column, but ensuring you use the 
Paste Values option. Now you can delete the helper column It’s quite common to receive data that has a mixture of date formats,
or that uses a date format that isn’t suitable to your region. Now let’s look at how to change the format of some dates.

You can see that this date format is currently using a 2-digit day, a 2-digit month, and a 4-digit year value. 
When you open the Number format dialog box, you can see in the Locale box, that this is an English (United Kingdom) date format.
You want to use a US date format, so you first change the locale to English (United States). In this list,
you can see there are several date options to choose from; let’s choose one which uses the full month name, then a 2-digit day,
and a 4-digit year value. You could then copy this format to the rest of the date cells. However, if you want to
format these dates using your own custom format, you can do that too. In the Number format list, you select Custom, 
and then choose an existing format that is similar to what you want and simply modify it to create a new custom format; 
here we’ll have the day, then 3-letter month, then 4-digit year.

To apply that new custom date format to the rest of the column you could either use the Format Painter tool, 
or you can select the rest of the column and choose the new custom format from the Custom list in the Number Format dialog box.
You might find that your data has some whitespace; that is, unwanted spaces in your data. Here you can see that we have some 
spaces at the start some spaces at the end and some unwanted double spaces in the middle of our data. We’ll first have a look at
what you can do to clean up these unwanted spaces in your data by using the Find & Replace feature in Excel. So you first select
all the data then on the Home tab, you click Find & Select, then Replace. To get rid of double spaces, 
you enter a double space in the ‘Find what’ box, and a single space in the ‘Replace with’ box. Then you click Find Next.

And choose Replace for each item you want to change. You could click Replace All to do all the fixes in one go but unless 
you are absolutely sure of the changes, it’s better practice to check and replace each one in sequence in case there are some 
valid reasons for these extra spaces. If you have a very large dataset you might also choose Replace All to save you a lot of time. 
So using the Find & Replace feature got rid of most of those unwanted whitespaces, but not all of them; we removed double 
spaces using that feature, but we also have some single spaces left at the start and end of some of the cells. 
You can’t use Find & Replace to remove single spaces otherwise you would lose ALL
spaces in your data - including standard spaces between words - which you don’t want to remove.
But, there is another tool you can use to clear spaces from cells, and that’s the TRIM function.
To use the TRIM function, you once again insert a helper column.

The TRIM function is simple to use; just type equals, then TRIM, then open parenthesis, then the
cell reference – in this case M2 – then close parenthesis, and press Enter. You can then double-click the Fill 
Handle symbol to copy this formula down to the remainder of the column. Now you need to copy the contents of the
new column N to column M, and remember once again to paste using the Paste Values option. You can now see that 
those erroneous spaces have been removed, or more accurately speaking, have been trimmed. And lastly, you can 
remove the helper column. we learned how to change the case of text, how to change date formatting,
and how to trim whitespace from data. we will discuss how to use the Flash Fill and Text to Columns 
features in Excel to help clean data.


More Excel Features for Cleaning Data

Now that we’ve learned how to change the case of text, how to change date formatting, and how to trim whitespace from data,
we’ll discuss how to use the Flash Fill and Text to Columns features in Excel to help clean data. We used Flash 
Fill briefly earlier in the course as a quick method of entering data that fits a specific pattern, 
such as the names of months or days of the week, but it can also be useful as a data cleaning tool.
It can split a column of full names into two separate columns for the forename and surname, and it can also help to modify 
the naming convention used in a column of names. For example, in the vehicle toy sales worksheet there is a column 
containing the last names of contacts, and another containing their first names. If you want to use the Flash Fill feature 
to combine these names into one name column, you first insert a helper column; let’s call it ‘Contactname’.
Then, in the first row in the new column you enter the full name of the first contact in the format of your choice; 
for example you might want surname, then a comma, then the forename, or you might want surname, and just an initial,
and so on; in this case let’s just enter the name in the standard format of forename then surname with a space between them, 
and then we press Enter. Next you start typing the second contact’s name in, and you’ll see that Flash Fill displays a
preview of the remaining names for you.

If you’re happy with what’s in the preview, all you have to do is press Enter, and it fills in the remaining names for 
you right down the column. It even works when there are two names in one of the columns such as Wing C here … and Da Cunha here.
Now you can remove the original columns if you no longer need them. So, in the previous task we saw how to combine two columns 
of data into one column using Flash Fill; now let’s see how to use it to modify the naming convention in a column. 
Let’s switch to the customer contacts worksheet. Then in the first data row of the next column, that is B2, 
we type the name of the first contact using whatever naming convention we want. We’ll use surname, then comma, then a space, 
then the forename, and press Enter.

Again, when we start typing the second contact’s name in the next row down, that is B3, Flash Fill detects the pattern
and fills in the remaining names in column B when we press Enter. You could then copy and paste the column header,
and delete the original column A. What we couldn’t do with Flash Fill was take a single column with two names in
and split that into two separate columns. We need to use the ‘Text to Columns’ feature to do that. 
So, we’ll close this worksheet and we won’t save the changes. Now, let’s see how the ‘Text to Columns’
feature can help with data cleaning too. As the name suggests, and unlike Flash Fill, the ‘Text to Columns’ feature can
take a column containing multi-part text and split that text into one or more other columns.

This can be useful for splitting any multi-part text, such as names or addresses, into separate component parts. 
Let’s open the customer contacts worksheet again. Then we’ll add column headings for the next two columns, and copy 
the cell format used in the first column header. Then we’ll widen the columns. If we then select the data in 
column A from A2 to A23, and on the Data tab, click Text to Columns, a wizard is launched. On the first page of the wizard, 
ensure that ‘Delimited’ is selected. On the second page, ensure that only ‘Space’ is selected as the delimiter.

On the third page of the wizard, click the little arrow next to ‘Destination’… and select cell B2 on the worksheet,
then click the little arrow again to return to the wizard. We’re now finished with this wizard. You can see that the full
customer contact names in column A have now been successfully split into two new columns in B and C, and you could now remove
column A if you no longer need it. We’ll close this worksheet, and again we won’t save the changes. 
You can also achieve the same result using functions. This would be required if you were using ‘Excel for the web’, 
the online version of Excel, as this doesn’t have the ‘Text to Columns’ feature. There’s also a bit more flexibility with functions,
which can be especially useful if you have names that are complex and mixed, such as having hyphenated names or some names 
with a middle initial, some with two middle initials, and some with no middle initial.

So, we open the customer contacts worksheet again. Then we’ll add column headings for the next two columns, 
and copy the cell format used in the first column header. Then we’ll widen the columns. Next, we enter the formula in
B2 to extract the forename part of the name. This formula extracts five characters from cell A2, starting from the left
and including the space. Then, in cell C2 we enter the formula to extract the surname part of the name. 
This formula extracts seven characters from cell A2, starting from the right.

Then we double-click the Fill Handle in cell B2 to use AutoFill to complete the column. And we do the same to the Fill Handle
in cell C2 to use AutoFill to complete that column also. we learned how to use the Flash Fill and Text to Columns 
features in Excel to help clean data.

Summary and Highlights
In this lesson, you have learned the following information:
It’s important to remove any duplicated or inaccurate data, and it’s important to remove any empty rows in your dataset. 
There are several other types of data inconsistency that you may need to resolve, in order to properly clean your data:  

Change the case of text
Fix date formatting errors
Trim whitepace from your data  
You can use the Flash Fill and Text to Columns features in Excel to manipulate and standardize your data, 
and functions can also be used to help manipulate and standardize your data. 

Question 1
What's one of the easiest common errors or inconsistencies to fix when importing data? 
A. Spelling mistakes


Question 2
What is the first thing you should do when checking spelling errors in Excel? 
A. Select the data you want to check for spelling 

Question 3
What feature can you use to fix text that appears in mixed case? 
A. Functions 

Question 4
What is one of the functions you can use to change the text case in your data? 
A. LOWER 

Question 5
What does the Flash Fill feature have in common with the UPPER, LOWER, and PROPER functions? 
A. Requires a helper column or row 

Question 6
Which of the following tasks can Flash Fill do? Select all that apply.
A. Separate first and last names from a single column
Combine two columns of data into one


Question 1
What is one of the issues that empty rows cause in your spreadsheet?
A. Formula errors 

Question 2
How to remove all empty rows at the same time in an imported spreadsheet?
A. Select all rows and then filter for Blanks, select these and then delete 

Question 3
There are two methods to locate and remove duplicated rows in Excel, what is the easiest way?
A. Select all data and click the Remove Duplicates button 

Question 4
What does the PROPER function do?
A. Changes text to sentence case 

Question 5
Why do you need to use the Paste Values option when you paste contents from a helper row to the original row?
A. Makes sure formulas aren’t also copied 

Question 6
What is one of the ways to apply new data formats to the rest of a column? 
Format button 
Format Painter tool 

Question 7
What tools or features can we use to split a single column with two names in it into two separate columns
with a name in each? Select all that apply
A. Format Painter tool 



